Sheep Fair Day
The real aim is not to see God in all things, it is that God, through
us, should see the things that we see.
SIMONE WEIL

I took God with me to the sheep fair. I said, ‘Look
there’s Liv, sitting on the wall, waiting;
these are pens, these are sheep,
this is their shit we are walking in, this is their fear.
See that man over there, stepping along the low walls
between pens, eyes always watching,
mouth always talking, he is the auctioneer.
That is wind in the ash trees above, that is sun
splashing us with running light and dark.
Those men over there, the ones with their faces sealed,
are buying or selling. Beyond in the ring
where the beasts pour in, huddle and rush,
the hoggets are auctioned in lots.
And that woman with the ruddy face and the home-cut hair
and a new child on her arm, that is how it is to be woman
with the milk running, sitting on wooden boards
in this shit-milky place of animals and birth and death
as the bidding rises and falls.’
Then I went back outside and found Fintan.
I showed God his hand as he sat on the rails,
how he let it trail down and his fingers played
in the curly back of a ewe. Fintan’s a sheep-man
he’s deep into sheep, though it’s cattle he keeps now,
for sound commercial reasons.
‘Feel that,’ I said,
‘feel with my heart the force in that hand

that’s twining her wool as he talks.’
Then I went with Fintan and Liv to Refreshments,
I let God sip tea, boiling hot, from a cup,
and I lent God my fingers to feel how they burned
when I tripped on a stone and it slopped.
‘This is hurt,’ I said, ‘there’ll be more.’
And the morning wore on and the sun climbed
and God felt how it is when I stand too long,
how the sickness rises, how the muscles burn.
Later, at the back end of the afternoon,
I went down to swim in the green slide of river,
I worked my way under the bridge, against the current,
then I showed how it is to turn onto your back
with, above you and a long way up, two gossiping pigeons,
and a clump of valerian, holding itself to the sky.
I remarked on the stone arch as I drifted through it,
how it dapples with sunlight from the water,
how the bridge hunkers down, crouching low in its track
and roars when a lorry drives over.
And later again, in the kitchen,
wrung out, at day’s ending, and empty,
I showed how it feels
to undo yourself,
to dissolve, and grow age-old, nameless:
woman sweeping a floor, darkness growing.
KERRY HARDIE
